@c =============================================================
@c = 元 翻 訳: 粕川正充＠お茶の水女子大学
@c = 加筆修正: 大木敦雄＠大塚.筑波大学 = 1998/11/25
@c = 20.4改訂: 大木敦雄＠大塚.筑波大学 = 1999/09/12
@c =============================================================
@c This is part of the Emacs manual.
@c Copyright (C) 1985, 86, 87, 93, 94, 95, 1997 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
@c See file emacs.texi for copying conditions.
@node Rmail, Dired, Sending Mail, Top
@c @chapter Reading Mail with Rmail
@chapter メイルの閲覧rmail
@c @cindex Rmail
@cindex rmail
@c @cindex reading mail
@cindex メイルを読む
@findex rmail
@findex rmail-mode
@vindex rmail-mode-hook

@c   Rmail is an Emacs subsystem for reading and disposing of mail that you
@c receive.  Rmail stores mail messages in files called Rmail files.
@c Reading the message in an Rmail file is done in a special major mode,
@c Rmail mode, which redefines most letters to run commands for managing
@c mail.  The command @code{rmail-mode} is used to switch into Rmail mode,
@c and it runs the hook @code{rmail-mode-hook} as usual, but don't run this
@c command by hand; it can't do a reasonable job unless the buffer is
@c visiting a proper Rmail file.
rmailは、受け取ったメイルを読んだり処理したりするためのEmacsの
サブシステムです。
rmailは、メイルメッセージをrmailファイルと呼ばれるファイルに格納します。
rmailファイル内のメッセージを読むには、
rmailモードという特別なメジャーモードで行います。
このモードでは、メイルを取り扱うコマンドを実行するように
ほとんどのアルファベット文字を再定義しています。
コマンド@code{rmail-mode}でrmailモードに切り替えます。
するといつものようにフック@code{rmail-mode-hook}が実行されます。
しかし、このコマンドを直接実行しないでください。
正しいrmailファイルを訪問しているバッファでない限り、
このコマンドはまともに動きません。

@menu
* Basic: Rmail Basics.       Basic concepts of Rmail, and simple use.
* Scroll: Rmail Scrolling.   Scrolling through a message.
* Motion: Rmail Motion.      Moving to another message.
* Deletion: Rmail Deletion.  Deleting and expunging messages.
* Inbox: Rmail Inbox.        How mail gets into the Rmail file.
* Files: Rmail Files.        Using multiple Rmail files.
* Output: Rmail Output.	     Copying message out to files.
* Labels: Rmail Labels.      Classifying messages by labeling them.
* Attrs: Rmail Attributes.   Certain standard labels, called attributes.
* Reply: Rmail Reply.        Sending replies to messages you are viewing.
* Summary: Rmail Summary.    Summaries show brief info on many messages.
* Sort: Rmail Sorting.       Sorting messages in Rmail.
* Display: Rmail Display.    How Rmail displays a message; customization.
* Editing: Rmail Editing.    Editing message text and headers in Rmail.
* Digest: Rmail Digest.      Extracting the messages from a digest message.
* Out of Rmail::	     Converting an Rmail file to mailbox format.
* Rot13: Rmail Rot13.	     Reading messages encoded in the rot13 code.
* Movemail: Movemail.        More details of fetching new mail.
@end menu

@node Rmail Basics
@c @section Basic Concepts of Rmail
@section rmailの基本概念

@c @cindex primary Rmail file
@cindex 主rmailファイル
@vindex rmail-file-name
@c   Using Rmail in the simplest fashion, you have one Rmail file
@c @file{~/RMAIL} in which all of your mail is saved.  It is called your
@c @dfn{primary Rmail file}.  The command @kbd{M-x rmail} reads your primary
@c Rmail file, merges new mail in from your inboxes, displays the first
@c message you haven't read yet, and lets you begin reading.  The variable
@c @code{rmail-file-name} specifies the name of the primary Rmail file.
もっとも簡単なrmailの使い方では、
@file{~/RMAIL}という1つのrmailファイルにすべてのメイルを保存します。
これを@dfn{主rmailファイル}（primary Rmail file）といいます。
コマンド@kbd{M-x rmail}は、主rmailファイルを読み込み、inbox
@footnote{【訳注】
システムが到着メイルを格納するファイルのこと。
実際のファイル名はシステムに依存する。}
内の新しいメイルを併合して、最初の未読メッセージを表示して
メイルを読み始められるようにします。
変数@code{rmail-file-name}で、主rmailファイルの名前を指定します。

@c   Rmail uses narrowing to hide all but one message in the Rmail file.
@c The message that is shown is called the @dfn{current message}.  Rmail
@c mode's special commands can do such things as delete the current
@c message, copy it into another file, send a reply, or move to another
@c message.  You can also create multiple Rmail files and use Rmail to move
@c messages between them.
rmailは、rmailファイルの1つのメッセージだけが見えるようにナロイングします。
表示されているメッセージを@dfn{カレントメッセージ}（current message）と
呼びます。
rmailモードの特別なコマンドを使えば、
カレントメッセージを削除@footnote{【訳注】
あとで説明されるように、
「削除」といっても実際には「削除印」を付けるだけ。}
する、別のファイルへコピーする、返信を送る、
別のメッセージへ移動することができます。
また、複数のrmailファイルを作って、
それらのあいだでメッセージを移すこともできます。

@c @cindex message number
@cindex メッセージ番号
@c   Within the Rmail file, messages are normally arranged sequentially in
@c order of receipt; you can specify other ways to sort them.  Messages are
@c assigned consecutive integers as their @dfn{message numbers}.  The
@c number of the current message is displayed in Rmail's mode line,
@c followed by the total number of messages in the file.  You can move to a
@c message by specifying its message number with the @kbd{j} key
@c (@pxref{Rmail Motion}).
rmailファイル内では、一般にメッセージは受け取った順に並べられます。
別の順序にソートすることもできます。
メッセージには@dfn{メッセージ番号}（message numbers）
として連続した整数が割り振られます。
カレントメッセージの番号は、rmailのモード行に表示され、
そのあとにファイル内の総メッセージ数も表示されます。
@kbd{j}キーにメッセージ番号を指定すれば、その番号のメッセージに移動できます
（@pxref{Rmail Motion}）。

@c @kindex s @r{(Rmail)}
@kindex s @r{（rmail）}
@findex rmail-save
@c   Following the usual conventions of Emacs, changes in an Rmail file
@c become permanent only when the file is saved.  You can save it with
@c @kbd{s} (@code{rmail-save}), which also expunges deleted messages from
@c the file first (@pxref{Rmail Deletion}).  To save the file without
@c expunging, use @kbd{C-x C-s}.  Rmail also saves the Rmail file after
@c merging new mail from an inbox file (@pxref{Rmail Inbox}).
Emacsの習慣に従って、rmailファイルの変更は
ファイルを保存したときにだけ反映されます。
@kbd{s}（@code{rmail-save}）で保存しますが、
削除（@pxref{Rmail Deletion}）と
指定されたメッセージをファイルからまず抹消します。
抹消せずにファイルを保存するには、@kbd{C-x C-s}を使います。
さらに、inboxから新着メイルを併合したあとにも
rmailファイルを保存します
（@pxref{Rmail Inbox}）。

@c @kindex q @r{(Rmail)}
@kindex q @r{（rmail）}
@findex rmail-quit
@c @kindex b @r{(Rmail)}
@kindex b @r{（rmail）}
@findex rmail-bury
@c   You can exit Rmail with @kbd{q} (@code{rmail-quit}); this expunges and
@c saves the Rmail file and then switches to another buffer.  But there is
@c no need to `exit' formally.  If you switch from Rmail to editing in
@c other buffers, and never happen to switch back, you have exited.  (The
@c Rmail command @kbd{b}, @code{rmail-bury}, does this for you.)  Just make
@c sure to save the Rmail file eventually (like any other file you have
@c changed).  @kbd{C-x s} is a good enough way to do this
@c (@pxref{Saving}).
rmailを終了するには@kbd{q}（@code{rmail-quit}）を使います。
（メッセージを）抹消しrmailファイルを保存してから、
別のバッファに切り替えます。
しかし、正しく「終了」する必要はありません。
rmailから別のバッファへ切り替えて、
そのあと戻らなければ終了したことになります。
（rmailコマンド@kbd{b}、@code{rmail-bury}がこれを行う。）
（変更したファイルにするのと同様に）
rmailファイルを確実に保存するようにしてください。
これには、@kbd{C-x s}がよいでしょう
（@pxref{Saving}）。

@node Rmail Scrolling
@c @section Scrolling Within a Message
@section メッセージをスクロールする

@c   When Rmail displays a message that does not fit on the screen, you
@c must scroll through it to read the rest.  You could do this with 
@c @kbd{C-v}, @kbd{M-v} and @kbd{M-<}, but in Rmail scrolling is so
@c frequent that it deserves to be easier to type.
rmailが表示するメッセージが画面に入りきらないとき、
残りの部分を読むにはスクロールする必要があります。
これには、@kbd{C-v}、@kbd{M-v}、@kbd{M-<}を使いますが、
rmailではスクロールを頻繁に行うので、もっと簡単な操作を用意してあります。

@table @kbd
@item @key{SPC}
@c Scroll forward (@code{scroll-up}).
先へ進める（@code{scroll-up}）。
@item @key{DEL}
@c Scroll backward (@code{scroll-down}).
まえへ戻す（@code{scroll-down}）。
@item .
@c Scroll to start of message (@code{rmail-beginning-of-message}).
メッセージの先頭へ戻る（@code{rmail-beginning-of-message}）。
@end table

@c @kindex SPC @r{(Rmail)}
@c @kindex DEL @r{(Rmail)}
@kindex SPC @r{（rmail）}
@kindex DEL @r{（rmail）}
@c   Since the most common thing to do while reading a message is to scroll
@c through it by screenfuls, Rmail makes @key{SPC} and @key{DEL} synonyms of
@c @kbd{C-v} (@code{scroll-up}) and @kbd{M-v} (@code{scroll-down})
メッセージを読むときもっとも多く行うことは
画面単位でのスクロールなので、
rmailでは、@key{SPC}と@key{DEL}は、それぞれ、
@kbd{C-v}（@code{scroll-up}）と@kbd{M-v}（@code{scroll-down}）の
同義になっています。

@c @kindex . @r{(Rmail)}
@kindex . @r{（rmail）}
@findex rmail-beginning-of-message
@c   The command @kbd{.} (@code{rmail-beginning-of-message}) scrolls back to the
@c beginning of the selected message.  This is not quite the same as @kbd{M-<}:
@c for one thing, it does not set the mark; for another, it resets the buffer
@c boundaries to the current message if you have changed them.
コマンド@kbd{.}（@code{rmail-beginning-of-message}）は、
選択されているメッセージの先頭に移動します。
このコマンドは@kbd{M-<}とまったく同じというわけではありません。
まず、マークを設定しません。
さらに、カレントメッセージを変更してあるとバッファの境界を再設定します。

@node Rmail Motion
@c @section Moving Among Messages
@section メッセージ間での移動

@c   The most basic thing to do with a message is to read it.  The way to
@c do this in Rmail is to make the message current.  The usual practice is
@c to move sequentially through the file, since this is the order of
@c receipt of messages.  When you enter Rmail, you are positioned at the
@c first message that you have not yet made current (that is, the first one
@c that has the @samp{unseen} attribute; @pxref{Rmail Attributes}).  Move
@c forward to see the other new messages; move backward to reexamine old
@c messages.
もっとも基本的な操作は、メッセージを読むことです。
rmailでこれを行うには、メッセージをカレントメッセージにします。
メッセージは受け取った順に並んでいるので、
通常はファイルの中を順に移動して読んでいきます。
rmailに入ると、カレントメッセージにしたことがない最初のメッセージから始まります
（つまり、未読を意味する@samp{unseen}属性が付いている最初のもの。
@pxref{Rmail Attributes}）。
先へ進めば他の新しいメッセージを読めます。
まえへ戻れば古いメッセージを読み直せます。

@table @kbd
@item n
@c Move to the next nondeleted message, skipping any intervening deleted
@c messages (@code{rmail-next-undeleted-message}).
削除されたメッセージを飛ばして、
削除されていないつぎのメッセージへ移動する
（@code{rmail-next-undeleted-message}）。
@item p
@c Move to the previous nondeleted message
@c (@code{rmail-previous-undeleted-message}).
削除されていないまえのメッセージへ移動する
（@code{rmail-previous-undeleted-message}）。
@item M-n
@c Move to the next message, including deleted messages
@c (@code{rmail-next-message}).
削除されたメッセージも含めてつぎのメッセージへ移動する
（@code{rmail-next-message}）。
@item M-p
@c Move to the previous message, including deleted messages
@c (@code{rmail-previous-message}).
削除されたメッセージも含めてまえのメッセージへ移動する
（@code{rmail-previous-message}）。
@item j
@c Move to the first message.  With argument @var{n}, move to
@c message number @var{n} (@code{rmail-show-message}).
最初のメッセージへ移動する。
数引数@var{n}を指定すると、メッセージ番号@var{n}のメッセージへ移動する
（@code{rmail-show-message}）。
@item >
@c Move to the last message (@code{rmail-last-message}).
最後のメッセージへ移動する（@code{rmail-last-message}）。
@item <
@c Move to the first message (@code{rmail-first-message}).
最初のメッセージへ移動する（@code{rmail-first-message}）。

@item M-s @var{regexp} @key{RET}
@c Move to the next message containing a match for @var{regexp}
@c (@code{rmail-search}).
正規表現@var{regexp}に一致するつぎのメッセージへ移動する
（@code{rmail-search}）。

@item - M-s @var{regexp} @key{RET}
@c Move to the previous message containing a match for @var{regexp}.
正規表現@var{regexp}に一致するまえのメッセージへ移動する。
@end table

@c @kindex n @r{(Rmail)}
@c @kindex p @r{(Rmail)}
@c @kindex M-n @r{(Rmail)}
@c @kindex M-p @r{(Rmail)}
@kindex n @r{（rmail）}
@kindex p @r{（rmail）}
@kindex M-n @r{（rmail）}
@kindex M-p @r{（rmail）}
@findex rmail-next-undeleted-message
@findex rmail-previous-undeleted-message
@findex rmail-next-message
@findex rmail-previous-message
@c   @kbd{n} and @kbd{p} are the usual way of moving among messages in
@c Rmail.  They move through the messages sequentially, but skip over
@c deleted messages, which is usually what you want to do.  Their command
@c definitions are named @code{rmail-next-undeleted-message} and
@c @code{rmail-previous-undeleted-message}.  If you do not want to skip
@c deleted messages---for example, if you want to move to a message to
@c undelete it---use the variants @kbd{M-n} and @kbd{M-p}
@c (@code{rmail-next-message} and @code{rmail-previous-message}).  A
@c numeric argument to any of these commands serves as a repeat
@c count.@refill
@kbd{n}と@kbd{p}は、rmailでメッセージ間を移動する普通の方法です。
これらのコマンドは、メッセージ間を順々に移動していきますが、
期待どおりに削除されたメッセージは飛び越えます。
コマンドの定義名は@code{rmail-next-undeleted-message}と
@code{rmail-previous-undeleted-message}です。
削除されたメッセージを飛び越したくない場合、
たとえば、削除されたメッセージをアンデリート@footnote{【訳注】
メッセージに付けた削除印を消すこと。}したいときは、
（@kbd{n}や@kbd{p}の）変形である
@kbd{M-n}や@kbd{M-p}（@code{rmail-next-message}、
@code{rmail-previous-message}）を使います。
これらのコマンドに数引数を指定すると、反復回数とみなします。

@c   In Rmail, you can specify a numeric argument by typing just the
@c digits.  You don't need to type @kbd{C-u} first.
rmailでは、数字を打つだけで数引数を指定できます。
始めに@kbd{C-u}を打つ必要はありません。

@c @kindex M-s @r{(Rmail)}
@kindex M-s @r{（rmail）}
@findex rmail-search
@c @cindex searching in Rmail
@cindex rmailの探索
@c   The @kbd{M-s} (@code{rmail-search}) command is Rmail's version of
@c search.  The usual incremental search command @kbd{C-s} works in Rmail,
@c but it searches only within the current message.  The purpose of
@c @kbd{M-s} is to search for another message.  It reads a regular
@c expression (@pxref{Regexps}) nonincrementally, then searches starting at
@c the beginning of the following message for a match.  It then selects
@c that message.  If @var{regexp} is empty, @kbd{M-s} reuses the regexp
@c used the previous time.
@kbd{M-s}（@code{rmail-search}）コマンドは、rmailにおける探索を行います。
通常のインクリメンタルサーチコマンド@kbd{C-s}もrmailで使えますが、
これはカレントメッセージの中だけを探索します。
@kbd{M-s}コマンドの目的は、他のメッセージを探すことです。
正規表現（@pxref{Regexps}）を読み終えてから、
つぎのメッセージの先頭から一致するものを探し始めます。
そしてみつかったメッセージを選択します。
@var{regexp}が空だと@kbd{M-s}は最後に使った正規表現を再使用します。

@c   To search backward in the file for another message, give @kbd{M-s} a
@c negative argument.  In Rmail you can do this with @kbd{- M-s}.
ファイル内で逆向きに他のメッセージを探索するには、
@kbd{M-s}に負の数引数を指定します。
rmailでは、@kbd{- M-s}と打てばよいのです。

@c   It is also possible to search for a message based on labels.
@c @xref{Rmail Labels}.
ラベルをもとにメッセージを探索することもできます。
@xref{Rmail Labels}。

@c @kindex j @r{(Rmail)}
@c @kindex > @r{(Rmail)}
@c @kindex < @r{(Rmail)}
@kindex j @r{（rmail）}
@kindex > @r{（rmail）}
@kindex < @r{（rmail）}
@findex rmail-show-message
@findex rmail-last-message
@findex rmail-first-message
@c   To move to a message specified by absolute message number, use @kbd{j}
@c (@code{rmail-show-message}) with the message number as argument.  With
@c no argument, @kbd{j} selects the first message.  @kbd{<}
@c (@code{rmail-first-message}) also selects the first message.  @kbd{>}
@c (@code{rmail-last-message}) selects the last message.
メッセージ番号を指定してメッセージへ移動するには、
メッセージ番号を引数として@kbd{j}（@code{rmail-show-message}）を使います。
引数がないと@kbd{j}は最初のメッセージを選択します。
@kbd{<}（@code{rmail-first-message}）も最初のメッセージを選択します。 
@kbd{>}（@code{rmail-last-message}）は最後のメッセージを選択します。

@node Rmail Deletion
@c @section Deleting Messages
@section メッセージの削除

@c @cindex deletion (Rmail)
@cindex 削除（rmail）
@c   When you no longer need to keep a message, you can @dfn{delete} it.  This
@c flags it as ignorable, and some Rmail commands pretend it is no longer
@c present; but it still has its place in the Rmail file, and still has its
@c message number.
メッセージを保存しておく必要がなくなったら、
そのメッセージを@dfn{削除}（delete）できます。
「無視せよ」という意味の削除印をメッセージに付けます。
すると、いくつかのrmailコマンドはそのメッセージが存在しないものとして扱います。
しかし、そのメッセージはまだrmailファイルの中にあって、
メッセージ番号も付いています。

@c @cindex expunging (Rmail)
@cindex 抹消（rmail）
@c   @dfn{Expunging} the Rmail file actually removes the deleted messages.
@c The remaining messages are renumbered consecutively.  Expunging is the only
@c action that changes the message number of any message, except for
@c undigestifying (@pxref{Rmail Digest}).
rmailファイルを@dfn{抹消}（expunging）すると、
削除印が付いたメッセージを本当に消し去ります。
残ったメッセージには番号を順に振り直します。
抹消は、アンダイジェスト（@pxref{Rmail Digest}）を除いて、
メッセージ番号を変更する唯一の動作です。

@table @kbd
@item d
@c Delete the current message, and move to the next nondeleted message
@c (@code{rmail-delete-forward}).
カレントメッセージを削除し、
削除されていないつぎのメッセージへ移動する
（@code{rmail-delete-forward}）。
@item C-d
@c Delete the current message, and move to the previous nondeleted
@c message (@code{rmail-delete-backward}).
カレントメッセージを削除し、
削除されていないまえのメッセージへ移動する
（@code{rmail-delete-backward}）。
@item u
@c Undelete the current message, or move back to a deleted message and
@c undelete it (@code{rmail-undelete-previous-message}).
カレントメッセージをアンデリートする、あるいは、
削除されたまえのメッセージへ戻ってアンデリートする
（@code{rmail-undelete-previous-message}）。
@item x
@c Expunge the Rmail file (@code{rmail-expunge}).
rmailファイル（の削除の付いたメッセージ）を抹消する
（@code{rmail-expunge}）。
@end table

@c @kindex d @r{(Rmail)}
@c @kindex C-d @r{(Rmail)}
@kindex d @r{（rmail）}
@kindex C-d @r{（rmail）}
@findex rmail-delete-forward
@findex rmail-delete-backward
@c   There are two Rmail commands for deleting messages.  Both delete the
@c current message and select another message.  @kbd{d}
@c (@code{rmail-delete-forward}) moves to the following message, skipping
@c messages already deleted, while @kbd{C-d} (@code{rmail-delete-backward})
@c moves to the previous nondeleted message.  If there is no nondeleted
@c message to move to in the specified direction, the message that was just
@c deleted remains current.  A numeric argument to either command reverses
@c the direction of motion after deletion.
rmailにはメッセージを削除するコマンドが2つあります。
どちらもカレントメッセージを削除し、別のメッセージを選択します。
@kbd{d}（@code{rmail-delete-forward}）は
すでに削除したメッセージを飛ばしてつぎのメッセージへ移動しますが、
@kbd{C-d}（@code{rmail-delete-backward}）はまえのメッセージへ移動します。
指定した方向に削除されていないメッセージがないときは、
削除したばかりのメッセージがカレントメッセージのままです。
どちらのコマンドに対しても、数引数を指定すると、
削除後の移動方向を反転します。

@vindex rmail-delete-message-hook
@c   Whenever Rmail deletes a message, it invokes the function(s) listed in
@c @code{rmail-delete-message-hook}.  When the hook functions are invoked,
@c the message has been marked deleted, but it is still the current message
@c in the Rmail buffer.
rmailがメッセージを削除するときはいつでも、
@code{rmail-delete-message-hook}に登録されている関数（群）を起動します。
フック関数が起動されるときには、メッセージに削除印が付いていますが、
rmailバッファではそのメッセージはカレントメッセージのままです。

@c @cindex undeletion (Rmail)
@cindex アンデリート（rmail）
@c @kindex x @r{(Rmail)}
@kindex x @r{（rmail）}
@findex rmail-expunge
@c @kindex u @r{(Rmail)}
@kindex u @r{（rmail）}
@findex rmail-undelete-previous-message
@c   To make all the deleted messages finally vanish from the Rmail file,
@c type @kbd{x} (@code{rmail-expunge}).  Until you do this, you can still
@c @dfn{undelete} the deleted messages.  The undeletion command, @kbd{u}
@c (@code{rmail-undelete-previous-message}), is designed to cancel the
@c effect of a @kbd{d} command in most cases.  It undeletes the current
@c message if the current message is deleted.  Otherwise it moves backward
@c to previous messages until a deleted message is found, and undeletes
@c that message.
削除したすべてのメッセージをrmailファイルから本当に消すには
@kbd{x}（@code{rmail-expunge}）と打ちます。
これを実行するまえならば、@dfn{アンデリート}（undelete）、つまり、
メッセージの削除印を消すことができます。
アンデリートコマンド、@kbd{u}（@code{rmail-undelete-previous-message}）は
@kbd{d}コマンドの効果をほとんどの場合打ち消します。
カレントメッセージが削除されていれば、
カレントメッセージをアンデリートします。
そうでなければ、削除されたメッセージが
みつかるまでまえへ戻り、そのメッセージをアンデリートします。

@c   You can usually undo a @kbd{d} with a @kbd{u} because the @kbd{u}
@c moves back to and undeletes the message that the @kbd{d} deleted.  But
@c this does not work when the @kbd{d} skips a few already-deleted messages
@c that follow the message being deleted; then the @kbd{u} command
@c undeletes the last of the messages that were skipped.  There is no clean
@c way to avoid this problem.  However, by repeating the @kbd{u} command,
@c you can eventually get back to the message that you intend to
@c undelete.  You can also select a particular deleted message with
@c the @kbd{M-p} command, then type @kbd{u} to undelete it.
普通は@kbd{u}で@kbd{d}をアンドゥできます。
なぜなら、@kbd{d}で削除したメッセージを
まえへ戻って探してそのメッセージを@kbd{u}がアンデリートするからです。
しかし、@kbd{d}がメッセージを削除してから
後続のすでに削除されたメッセージを飛び越す場合には、
うまくいきません。
この場合、@kbd{u}コマンドは飛び越したメッセージのうちの
最後のものをアンデリートします。
この問題を回避する簡単な方法はありません。
ですが、@kbd{u}コマンドを繰り返せば、
最終的にはアンデリートしたいメッセージに辿り着きます。
あるいは、@kbd{M-p}コマンドで目的の削除されたメッセージに移動してから
@kbd{u}を打ってアンデリートします。

@c   A deleted message has the @samp{deleted} attribute, and as a result
@c @samp{deleted} appears in the mode line when the current message is
@c deleted.  In fact, deleting or undeleting a message is nothing more than
@c adding or removing this attribute.  @xref{Rmail Attributes}.
削除されたメッセージには、@samp{deleted}という属性が付きます。
その結果、カレントメッセージが削除されていると
モード行に@samp{deleted}と表示されます。
メッセージを削除する、あるいは、アンデリートすると、
実際には、メッセージにこの属性を付加する、あるいは、取り去るだけです。
@xref{Rmail Attributes}。

@node Rmail Inbox
@c @section Rmail Files and Inboxes
@section rmailファイルとinbox
@c @cindex inbox file
@cindex inboxファイル

@c   The operating system places incoming mail for you in a file that we
@c call your @dfn{inbox}.  When you start up Rmail, it runs a C program
@c called @code{movemail} to copy the new messages from your inbox into
@c your primary Rmail file, which also contains other messages saved from
@c previous Rmail sessions.  It is in this file that you actually read the
@c mail with Rmail.  This operation is called @dfn{getting new mail}.  You
@c can get new mail at any time in Rmail by typing @kbd{g}.
オペレーティングシステムは、@dfn{inbox}と呼ばれるファイルに
到着したメイルを格納します。
rmailを起動すると、@code{movemail}と呼ばれるCプログラムが走り、
inboxから主rmailファイルへ新着メッセージをコピーします。
ただし、主rmailファイルには、以前のrmailセッションで保存したメッセージも
入っています。
実際にrmailで読むメイルはこのファイルの中にあるのです。
この操作を、@dfn{新着メイルの取得}といいます。
rmail内で@kbd{g}と打てば、いつでも新着メイルを取得できます。

@vindex rmail-primary-inbox-list
@c @cindex @code{MAIL} environment variable
@cindex 環境変数@code{MAIL}
@cindex @code{MAIL}（環境変数）
@c   The variable @code{rmail-primary-inbox-list} contains a list of the
@c files which are inboxes for your primary Rmail file.  If you don't set
@c this variable explicitly, it is initialized from the @code{MAIL}
@c environment variable, or, as a last resort, set to @code{nil}, which
@c means to use the default inbox.  The default inbox is
@c @file{/var/mail/@var{username}}, @file{/usr/spool/mail/@var{username}},
@c or @file{/usr/mail/@var{username}}, depending on your operating system.
変数@code{rmail-primary-inbox-list}には、
主rmailファイルのinboxとなるファイルのリストを格納します。
この変数を明示的に設定しなければ、
環境変数@code{MAIL}で初期化するか、あるいは、
最後の手段として、デフォルトのinboxを使うことを意味する
@code{nil}に設定します。
デフォルトのinboxはオペレーティングシステムに依存して、
@file{/var/mail/@var{username}}、@file{/usr/spool/mail/@var{username}}、
@file{/usr/mail/@var{username}}になります。

@c   To see what the default is on your system, use @kbd{C-h v
@c rmail-primary-inbox @key{RET}}.  You can specify the inbox file(s) for
@c any Rmail file with the command @code{set-rmail-inbox-list}; see
@c @ref{Rmail Files}.
システムのデフォルトを調べるには、
@kbd{C-h v rmail-primary-inbox @key{RET}}を使います。
コマンド@code{set-rmail-inbox-list}で、
任意のrmailファイルに対して使うinboxファイルを指定できます。
@ref{Rmail Files}を参照してください。

@c   There are two reasons for having separate Rmail files and inboxes.
rmailファイルとinboxに分ける理由は2つあります。

@enumerate
@item
@c The inbox file format varies between operating systems and according to
@c the other mail software in use.  Only one part of Rmail needs to know
@c about the alternatives, and it need only understand how to convert all
@c of them to Rmail's own format.
inboxのファイル形式は、オペレーティングシステムや
使用するメイルソフトに依存して異なる。
rmailの一部分だけが違いを知っていればよく、
しかも、rmail独自の形式への変換方法だけを知っていればよい。

@item
@c It is very cumbersome to access an inbox file without danger of losing
@c mail, because it is necessary to interlock with mail delivery.
@c Moreover, different operating systems use different interlocking
@c techniques.  The strategy of moving mail out of the inbox once and for
@c all into a separate Rmail file avoids the need for interlocking in all
@c the rest of Rmail, since only Rmail operates on the Rmail file.
メイル紛失という危険を犯さずにinboxを参照するのはたいへん厄介である。
というのは、メイル配送プログラムと相互排除を行う必要があるから。
さらに、オペレーティングシステムごとに相互排除の手法が異なる。
いったんinboxからメイルを取り出し、あとは別のrmailファイルを使う方式では、
rmailファイルしか扱わないのでrmailの各所で相互排除する必要がなくなる。
@end enumerate

@c   Rmail was written to use Babyl format as its internal format.  Since
@c then, we have recognized that the usual inbox format on Unix and GNU
@c systems is adequate for the job, and we plan to change Rmail to use that
@c as its internal format.  However, the Rmail file will still be separate
@c from the inbox file, even on systems where their format is the same.
rmailでは独自の内部形式（Babyl形式）を使っています。
当初からUNIXやGNUシステムの普通のinbox形式で十分であると気づいていて、
inbox形式を内部形式として使おうと計画しています。
しかし、たとえファイルの形式が同一であっても、
rmailファイルはinboxファイルとは独立して存在し続けるでしょう。

@node Rmail Files
@c @section Multiple Rmail Files
@section 複数のrmailファイルの扱い方

@c   Rmail operates by default on your @dfn{primary Rmail file}, which is named
@c @file{~/RMAIL} and receives your incoming mail from your system inbox file.
@c But you can also have other Rmail files and edit them with Rmail.  These
@c files can receive mail through their own inboxes, or you can move messages
@c into them with explicit Rmail commands (@pxref{Rmail Output}).
rmailはデフォルトでは個人の主rmailファイルを操作します。
このファイルは、@file{~/RMAIL}という名前で、
システムのinboxファイルから到着メイルを受け取ります。
しかし、別のrmailファイルを作ってそれをrmailで編集することもできます。
これらのファイルはそれぞれ独自のinboxからメイルを受け取ったり、
あるいは、rmailコマンドでそれらのあいだでメッセージを移せます
（@pxref{Rmail Output}）。

@table @kbd
@item i @var{file} @key{RET}
@c Read @var{file} into Emacs and run Rmail on it (@code{rmail-input}).
@var{file}をEmacsに読み込み、それに対してrmailを実行する
（@code{rmail-input}）。

@item M-x set-rmail-inbox-list @key{RET} @var{files} @key{RET}
@c Specify inbox file names for current Rmail file to get mail from.
現在のrmailファイルに対してメイルを取り込むinboxファイルを指定する。

@item g
@c Merge new mail from current Rmail file's inboxes
@c (@code{rmail-get-new-mail}).
現在のrmailファイルのinboxから新着メイルを取得する
（@code{rmail-get-new-mail}）。

@item C-u g @var{file} @key{RET}
@c Merge new mail from inbox file @var{file}.
inboxファイル@var{file}から新着メイルを取得する。
@end table

@c @kindex i @r{(Rmail)}
@kindex i @r{（rmail）}
@findex rmail-input
@c   To run Rmail on a file other than your primary Rmail file, you may use
@c the @kbd{i} (@code{rmail-input}) command in Rmail.  This visits the file
@c in Rmail mode.  You can use @kbd{M-x rmail-input} even when not in
@c Rmail.
主rmailファイル以外のファイルに対してrmailを実行するには、
rmailで@kbd{i}（@code{rmail-input}）コマンドを使います。
このコマンドは、指定されたファイルをrmailモードで訪問します。
rmailの外からでも@kbd{M-x rmail-input}を使えます。

@c   The file you read with @kbd{i} should normally be a valid Rmail file.
@c If it is not, Rmail tries to decompose it into a stream of messages in
@c various known formats.  If it succeeds, it converts the whole file to an
@c Rmail file.  If you specify a file name that doesn't exist, @kbd{i}
@c initializes a new buffer for creating a new Rmail file.
@kbd{i}で読み込むファイルは、  通常、正しいrmailファイルであるべきです。
そうでなければ、rmailは既知のさまざまな形式を用いて
メッセージに分解しようと試みます。
それに成功すれば、ファイル全体をrmailファイルに変換します。
存在しないファイル名を指定すると、
@kbd{i}コマンドは新たなrmailファイル用の新しいバッファを初期化します。

@vindex rmail-secondary-file-directory
@vindex rmail-secondary-file-regexp
@c   You can also select an Rmail file from a menu.  Choose first the menu
@c bar Classify item, then from the Classify menu choose the Input Rmail
@c File item; then choose the Rmail file you want.  The variables
@c @code{rmail-secondary-file-directory} and
@c @code{rmail-secondary-file-regexp} specify which files to offer in the
@c menu: the first variable says which directory to find them in; the
@c second says which files in that directory to offer (all those that match
@c the regular expression).  These variables also apply to choosing a file
@c for output (@pxref{Rmail Output}).
メニューからrmailファイルを選択することもできます。
まず、メニューバーから項目Classifyを選びます。
続いて、Classifyメニューから項目Input Rmail Fileを選びます。
そして、望みのrmailファイルを選択します。
変数@code{rmail-secondary-file-directory}と 
変数@code{rmail-secondary-file-regexp}で、
メニューに含めるべきファイルを指定します。
最初の変数では探すべきディレクトリを指定し、
2番目の変数ではディレクトリ中のどのファイルか
（正規表現に一致するもの）を指定します。
これらの変数は出力用のファイルを選択するときにも使われます。

@findex set-rmail-inbox-list
@c   Each Rmail file can contain a list of inbox file names; you can specify
@c this list with @kbd{M-x set-rmail-inbox-list @key{RET} @var{files}
@c @key{RET}}.  The argument can contain any number of file names, separated
@c by commas.  It can also be empty, which specifies that this file should
@c have no inboxes.  Once a list of inboxes is specified, the Rmail file
@c remembers it permanently until you specify a different list.
各rmailファイルには、inboxファイル名の一覧を持たせることができます。
この一覧は、@kbd{M-x set-rmail-inbox-list @key{RET}
@var{files} @key{RET}}で指定します。
引数には、コンマで区切っていくつもファイル名を書けます。
引数が空でもかまいませんが、その場合、
そのファイルにはinboxがないという指定になります。
いったんinboxの一覧を指定すれば、新たに指定し直さない限り、
rmailファイルはそれを覚えています。

@c   As a special exception, if your primary Rmail file does not specify any
@c inbox files, it uses your standard system inbox.
特別な例外として、主rmailファイルにinboxファイルを指定しないと、
システム標準のinboxを使用します。

@c @kindex g @r{(Rmail)}
@kindex g @r{（rmail）}
@findex rmail-get-new-mail
@c   The @kbd{g} command (@code{rmail-get-new-mail}) merges mail into the
@c current Rmail file from its specified inboxes.  If the Rmail file
@c has no inboxes, @kbd{g} does nothing.  The command @kbd{M-x rmail}
@c also merges new mail into your primary Rmail file.
@kbd{g}（@code{rmail-get-new-mail}）コマンドは、
指定されたinboxから現在のrmailファイルにメイルを併合します。
rmailファイルにinboxが指定されていなければ、@kbd{g}は何もしません。
コマンド@kbd{M-x rmail}も、主rmailファイルに新着メイルを併合します。

@c   To merge mail from a file that is not the usual inbox, give the
@c @kbd{g} key a numeric argument, as in @kbd{C-u g}.  Then it reads a file
@c name and merges mail from that file.  The inbox file is not deleted or
@c changed in any way when @kbd{g} with an argument is used.  This is,
@c therefore, a general way of merging one file of messages into another.
普通のinboxでないファイルからメイルを併合するには、
@kbd{C-u g}のように@kbd{g}キーに数引数を指定します。
すると、ファイル名を読み取り、そのファイルからメイルを併合します。
@kbd{g}に引数を指定したときには、
inboxファイルを削除したり変更したりしません。
したがって、これは、メッセージファイルを別のメッセージファイルへ
併合する一般的な方法です。

@node Rmail Output
@c @section Copying Messages Out to Files
@section ファイルへのメッセージのコピー

@c   These commands copy messages from an Rmail file into another file.
以下のコマンドで、rmailファイルから別のファイルへメッセージをコピーできます。

@table @kbd
@item o @var{file} @key{RET}
@c Append a copy of the current message to the file @var{file}, using Rmail
@c file format by default (@code{rmail-output-to-rmail-file}).
デフォルトではrmailファイル形式を用いて、
カレントメッセージのコピーをファイル@var{file}へ追加する。
（@code{rmail-output-to-rmail-file}）。

@item C-o @var{file} @key{RET}
@c Append a copy of the current message to the file @var{file}, using
@c system inbox file format by default (@code{rmail-output}).
デフォルトではシステムのinboxファイル形式を用いて、
カレントメッセージのコピーをファイル@var{file}へ追加する。

@item w @var{file} @key{RET}
@c Output just the message body to the file @var{file}, taking the default
@c file name from the message @samp{Subject} header.
メッセージのヘッダ@samp{Subject}からデフォルトのファイル名を作り、
メッセージの本文だけをファイル@var{file}に書き出す。
@end table

@c @kindex o @r{(Rmail)}
@kindex o @r{（rmail）}
@findex rmail-output-to-rmail-file
@c @kindex C-o @r{(Rmail)}
@kindex C-o @r{（rmail）}
@findex rmail-output
@c   The commands @kbd{o} and @kbd{C-o} copy the current message into a
@c specified file.  This file may be an Rmail file or it may be in system
@c inbox format; the output commands ascertain the file's format and write
@c the copied message in that format.
コマンド@kbd{o}と@kbd{C-o}は、
カレントメッセージを指定したファイルへコピーします。
そのファイルは、rmailファイルでもシステムのinbox形式でもかまいません。
出力コマンドは、ファイルの形式を確かめその形式に従って
メッセージのコピーを書き込みます。

@c   When copying a message to a file in Unix mail file format, these
@c commands include whichever header fields are currently visible.  Use the
@c @kbd{t} command first, if you wish, to specify which headers to show
@c (and copy).
メッセージをUNIXのmailファイル形式のファイルにコピーする場合、
これらのコマンドは現在表示しているヘッダもコピーします。
表示（しコピー）するヘッダを指定したい場合には、
あらかじめ@kbd{t}コマンドを使ってください。

@c   The @kbd{o} and @kbd{C-o} commands differ in two ways: each has its
@c own separate default file name, and each specifies a choice of format to
@c use when the file does not already exist.  The @kbd{o} command uses
@c Rmail format when it creates a new file, while @kbd{C-o} uses system
@c inbox format for a new file.  The default file name for @kbd{o} is the
@c file name used last with @kbd{o}, and the default file name for
@c @kbd{C-o} is the file name used last with @kbd{C-o}.
コマンド@kbd{o}と@kbd{C-o}は2つの点で異ります。
それぞれ、独自のデフォルトのファイル名を持ち、
ファイルが既存でない場合に使用する形式も別です。
新たにファイルを作成するとき、
@kbd{o}コマンドはrmail形式を使いますが、
@kbd{C-o}コマンドはシステムのinbox形式を使います。
デフォルトのファイル名は、
@kbd{o}では最後に@kbd{o}で使ったものになり、
@kbd{C-o}も最後に@kbd{C-o}で使ったものです。

@c   If the output file is an Rmail file currently visited in an Emacs buffer,
@c the output commands copy the message into that buffer.  It is up to you
@c to save the buffer eventually in its file.
出力ファイルが、現在Emacsバッファで訪れているrmailファイルのときには、
出力コマンドはメッセージをバッファにコピーします。
そのバッファをファイルに保存するのはユーザーの責任です。

@c @kindex w @r{(Rmail)}
@kindex w @r{（rmail）}
@findex rmail-output-body-to-file
@c   Sometimes you may receive a message whose body holds the contents of a
@c file.  You can save the body to a file (excluding the message header)
@c with the @kbd{w} command (@code{rmail-output-body-to-file}).  Often
@c these messages contain the intended file name in the @samp{Subject}
@c field, so the @kbd{w} command uses the @samp{Subject} field as the
@c default for the output file name.  However, the file name is read using
@c the minibuffer, so you can specify a different name if you wish.
ときどき、ファイルの内容をそのまま本文にしたようなメッセージを
受け取ることもあるでしょう。
@kbd{w}（@code{rmail-output-body-to-file}）コマンドで、
（メッセージのヘッダを除いて）本文をファイルに保存できます。
こうしたメッセージでは、@samp{Subject}フィールドに意図するファイル名が
入れていることがままあるので、
@kbd{w}コマンドはデフォルトの出力ファイル名に
@samp{Subject}フィールドを使います。
しかし、ミニバッファでファイル名を読み取るので、
好きなファイル名を指定できます。

@c   You can also output a message to an Rmail file chosen with a menu.
@c Choose first the menu bar Classify item, then from the Classify menu
@c choose the Output Rmail File menu item; then choose the Rmail file you want.
@c This outputs the current message to that file, like the @kbd{o} command.
@c The variables @code{rmail-secondary-file-directory} and
@c @code{rmail-secondary-file-regexp} specify which files to offer in the
@c menu: the first variable says which directory to find them in; the
@c second says which files in that directory to offer (all those that match
@c the regular expression).
メニューを使ってrmailファイルにメッセージを出力することもできます。
まず、メニューバーの項目Classifyを選択し、
Classifyメニューから項目Output Rmail File Menuを選択します。
そして、望むrmailファイルを選択します。
これは、@kbd{o}コマンドのように、
カレントメッセージをそのファイルに出力します。
変数@code{rmail-secondary-file-directory}と 
変数@code{rmail-secondary-file-regexp}で、
メニューに含めるべきファイル名を選択します。
最初の変数では探すべきディレクトリを指定し、
2番目の変数ではディレクトリ中のどのファイルか
（正規表現に一致するもの）を指定します。

@vindex rmail-delete-after-output
@c   Copying a message gives the original copy of the message the
@c @samp{filed} attribute, so that @samp{filed} appears in the mode line
@c when such a message is current.  If you like to keep just a single copy
@c of every mail message, set the variable @code{rmail-delete-after-output}
@c to @code{t}; then the @kbd{o} and @kbd{C-o} commands delete the original
@c message after copying it.  (You can undelete the original afterward if
@c you wish.)
メッセージをコピーすると、もとのメッセージには@samp{filed}属性が付きます。
そのメッセージがカレントメッセージになると、
モード行に@samp{filed}と表示されます。
メイルメッセージをそれぞれ1個だけにしておきたい場合には、
変数@code{rmail-delete-after-output}に@code{t}を設定します。 
すると、コマンド@kbd{o}と@kbd{C-o}は、メッセージをコピーすると
もとのメッセージを削除します。
（必要ならば、もとのメッセージをアンデリートできます。）

@c   Copying messages into files in system inbox format uses the header
@c fields that are displayed in Rmail at the time.  Thus, if you use the
@c @kbd{t} command to view the entire header and then copy the message, the
@c entire header is copied.  @xref{Rmail Display}.
システムのinbox形式でファイルにメッセージをコピーするときには、
rmailで今表示しているヘッダフィールドを使います。
したがって、@kbd{t}コマンドを使ってヘッダ全体を見えるようにしてから
メッセージをコピーすると、ヘッダ全体がコピーされます。
@xref{Rmail Display}。

@vindex rmail-output-file-alist
@c   The variable @code{rmail-output-file-alist} lets you specify
@c intelligent defaults for the output file, based on the contents of the
@c current message.  The value should be a list whose elements have this
@c form:
変数@code{rmail-output-file-alist}を使うと、
カレントメッセージの内容に基づいて
デフォルトの出力ファイルを賢く指定できます。
値はつぎの形式の要素から成るリストである必要があります。

@example
(@var{regexp} . @var{name-exp})
@end example

@noindent
@c If there's a match for @var{regexp} in the current message, then the
@c default file name for output is @var{name-exp}.  If multiple elements
@c match the message, the first matching element decides the default file
@c name.  The subexpression @var{name-exp} may be a string constant giving
@c the file name to use, or more generally it may be any Lisp expression
@c that returns a file name as a string.  @code{rmail-output-file-alist}
@c applies to both @kbd{o} and @kbd{C-o}.
カレントメッセージが@var{regexp}で指定されるパターンに一致すると、
デフォルトの出力ファイル名は@var{name-exp}になります。
複数の要素がメッセージに一致する場合は、
最初に一致した要素がデフォルトのファイル名になります。
部分要素@var{name-exp}は、ファイル名を指定する文字列か、
より一般的には、文字列としてファイル名を返すLisp式です。
変数@code{rmail-output-file-alist}は、
@kbd{o}と@kbd{C-o}の両方に適用されます。

@node Rmail Labels
@c @section Labels
@section ラベル
@c @cindex label (Rmail)
@c @cindex attribute (Rmail)
@cindex ラベル（rmail）
@cindex 属性（rmail）

@c   Each message can have various @dfn{labels} assigned to it as a means
@c of classification.  Each label has a name; different names are different
@c labels.  Any given label is either present or absent on a particular
@c message.  A few label names have standard meanings and are given to
@c messages automatically by Rmail when appropriate; these special labels
@c are called @dfn{attributes}.
各メッセージには分類のためにいろいろな@dfn{ラベル}（label）が付きます。
各ラベルには名前があって、名前が異なれば別のラベルです。
どのラベルもメッセージに付いているか付いていないかのどちらかです。
少数のラベル名には標準的な意味があり、
適切な場合にはrmailが自動的にメッセージに付けます。
これらの特別なラベルを@dfn{属性}（attribute）と呼びます。
@ifinfo
@c (@xref{Rmail Attributes}.)
（@pxref{Rmail Attributes}。）
@end ifinfo
@c All other labels are assigned only by users.
それ以外のすべてのラベルはユーザーだけが付けます。

@table @kbd
@item a @var{label} @key{RET}
@c Assign the label @var{label} to the current message (@code{rmail-add-label}).
カレントメッセージにラベル@var{label}を付ける
（@code{rmail-add-label}）。
@item k @var{label} @key{RET}
@c Remove the label @var{label} from the current message (@code{rmail-kill-label}).
カレントメッセージからラベル@var{label}を取り去る
（@code{rmail-kill-label}）。
@item C-M-n @var{labels} @key{RET}
@c Move to the next message that has one of the labels @var{labels}
@c (@code{rmail-next-labeled-message}).
ラベル群@var{labels}のどれか1つを持つつぎのメッセージへ移動する
（@code{rmail-next-labeled-message}）。
@item C-M-p @var{labels} @key{RET}
@c Move to the previous message that has one of the labels @var{labels}
@c (@code{rmail-previous-labeled-message}).
ラベル群@var{labels}のどれか1つを持つまえのメッセージへ移動する
（@code{rmail-previous-labeled-message}）。
@item C-M-l @var{labels} @key{RET}
@c Make a summary of all messages containing any of the labels @var{labels}
@c (@code{rmail-summary-by-labels}).
ラベル群@var{labels}のどれかを持つすべての
メッセージのサマリを作成する
（@code{rmail-summary-by-labels}）。
@end table

@c @kindex a @r{(Rmail)}
@c @kindex k @r{(Rmail)}
@kindex a @r{（rmail）}
@kindex k @r{（rmail）}
@findex rmail-add-label
@findex rmail-kill-label
@c   The @kbd{a} (@code{rmail-add-label}) and @kbd{k}
@c (@code{rmail-kill-label}) commands allow you to assign or remove any
@c label on the current message.  If the @var{label} argument is empty, it
@c means to assign or remove the same label most recently assigned or
@c removed.
コマンド@kbd{a}（@code{rmail-add-label}）と
@kbd{k}（@code{rmail-kill-label}）で、
カレントメッセージに任意のラベルを付けたり取り去ったりできます。
引数が空の場合は、もっとも最近に付けたり取り去ったりしたものと
同じラベルを意味します。

@c   Once you have given messages labels to classify them as you wish, there
@c are two ways to use the labels: in moving and in summaries.
分類するためのラベルをメッセージにいったん付ければ、
そのラベルを使って2つのこと、つまり、移動とサマリ作成ができます。

@c @kindex C-M-n @r{(Rmail)}
@c @kindex C-M-p @r{(Rmail)}
@kindex C-M-n @r{（rmail）}
@kindex C-M-p @r{（rmail）}
@findex rmail-next-labeled-message
@findex rmail-previous-labeled-message
@c   The command @kbd{C-M-n @var{labels} @key{RET}}
@c (@code{rmail-next-labeled-message}) moves to the next message that has
@c one of the labels @var{labels}.  The argument @var{labels} specifies one
@c or more label names, separated by commas.  @kbd{C-M-p}
@c (@code{rmail-previous-labeled-message}) is similar, but moves backwards
@c to previous messages.  A numeric argument to either command serves as a
@c repeat count.
コマンド@kbd{C-M-n @var{labels} @key{RET}}（@code{rmail-next-labeled-message}）
は、ラベル群@var{labels}のどれか1つを持つつぎのメッセージへ移動します。
引数@var{labels}には、1つのラベル名、あるいは、
コンマで区切って複数のラベル名を指定します。
@kbd{C-M-p}（@code{rmail-previous-labeled-message}）も同様ですが、
まえのメッセージへ向かって逆向きに移動します。
これらのコマンドに対する数引数は、反復回数になります。

@c   The command @kbd{C-M-l @var{labels} @key{RET}}
@c (@code{rmail-summary-by-labels}) displays a summary containing only the
@c messages that have at least one of a specified set of labels.  The
@c argument @var{labels} is one or more label names, separated by commas.
@c @xref{Rmail Summary}, for information on summaries.@refill
コマンド@kbd{C-M-l @var{labels} @key{RET}}（@code{rmail-summary-by-labels}）
は、指定したラベルの集まりの中の少なくとも1つのラベルを持つような
メッセージからなるサマリを表示します。
引数@var{labels}は、1つのラベル名、あるいは、
コンマで区切った複数のラベル名です。
サマリについては、@xref{Rmail Summary}。

@c   If the @var{labels} argument to @kbd{C-M-n}, @kbd{C-M-p} or
@c @kbd{C-M-l} is empty, it means to use the last set of labels specified
@c for any of these commands.
@kbd{C-M-n}、@kbd{C-M-p}、@kbd{C-M-l}に対する引数@var{labels}が空の場合には、
これらのコマンドのどれかにもっとも最近に指定したラベルの集まりを意味します。

@node Rmail Attributes
@c @section Rmail Attributes
@section rmailの属性

@c   Some labels such as @samp{deleted} and @samp{filed} have built-in
@c meanings and are assigned to or removed from messages automatically at
@c appropriate times; these labels are called @dfn{attributes}.  Here is a
@c list of Rmail attributes:
@samp{deleted}や@samp{filed}のようなラベルのいくつかには
組み込みの意味付けがあり、
適切なときに自動的にメッセージに付けられたり取り去られたりします。
このようなラベルを@dfn{属性}（attribute）と呼びます。
以下はrmailの属性の一覧です。

@table @samp
@item unseen
@c Means the message has never been current.  Assigned to messages when
@c they come from an inbox file, and removed when a message is made
@c current.  When you start Rmail, it initially shows the first message
@c that has this attribute.
メッセージが一度もカレントメッセージになったことがないことを意味する。
inboxファイルから取り込またときにメッセージに付けられ、
メッセージがカレントメッセージになると取り去られる。
rmailを起動すると、まずこの属性を持つ最初のメッセージが表示される。
@item deleted
@c Means the message is deleted.  Assigned by deletion commands and
@c removed by undeletion commands (@pxref{Rmail Deletion}).
メッセージが削除されたことを意味する。
削除コマンドが付け、アンデリートコマンドが取り去る
（@pxref{Rmail Deletion}）。
@item filed
@c Means the message has been copied to some other file.  Assigned by the
@c file output commands (@pxref{Rmail Files}).
メッセージは他のファイルへコピーされたことを意味する。
ファイル出力コマンドが付ける
（@pxref{Rmail Files}）。
@item answered
@c Means you have mailed an answer to the message.  Assigned by the @kbd{r}
@c command (@code{rmail-reply}).  @xref{Rmail Reply}.
メッセージに返信したことを意味する。
@kbd{r}（@code{rmail-reply}）コマンドが付ける。
@pxref{Rmail Reply}。
@item forwarded
@c Means you have forwarded the message.  Assigned by the @kbd{f} command
@c (@code{rmail-forward}).  @xref{Rmail Reply}.
メッセージを他者に転送したことを意味する。
@kbd{f}（@code{rmail-forward}）コマンドが付ける。
@pxref{Rmail Reply}。
@item edited
@c Means you have edited the text of the message within Rmail.
@c @xref{Rmail Editing}.
rmail内でメッセージのテキストを編集したことを意味する。
@pxref{Rmail Editing}。
@item resent
@c Means you have resent the message.  Assigned by the command @kbd{M-x
@c rmail-resend}.  @xref{Rmail Reply}.
メッセージを再送信したことを意味する。
@kbd{M-xrmail-resend}コマンドが付ける。
@pxref{Rmail Reply}。
@end table

@c   All other labels are assigned or removed only by the user, and have no
@c standard meaning.
これら以外のすべてのラベルはユーザーだけが付けたり取り去ったりするのであって、
標準的な意味はまったくありません。

@node Rmail Reply
@c @section Sending Replies
@section 返事の送信

@c   Rmail has several commands that use Mail mode to send outgoing mail.
@c @xref{Sending Mail}, for information on using Mail mode, including
@c certain features meant to work with Rmail.  What this section documents
@c are the special commands of Rmail for entering Mail mode.  Note that the
@c usual keys for sending mail---@kbd{C-x m}, @kbd{C-x 4 m}, and @kbd{C-x 5
@c m}---are available in Rmail mode and work just as they usually do.
rmailには、メイルの送信にメイル（mail）モードを使うコマンドが
いくつかあります。
メイル（mail）モードの使用方法については、rmailから使えるある種の機能も含めて、
@xref{Sending Mail}。
本節では、メイル（mail）モードへ入るrmailに特有のコマンドを説明します。
メイル送信のための通常のキー、
@kbd{C-x m}、@kbd{C-x 4 m}、@kbd{C-x 5 m}は、
rmailモードでも使え、その動作もまったく同じであることに注意してください。

@table @kbd
@item m
@c Send a message (@code{rmail-mail}).
メッセージを送信する（@code{rmail-mail}）。
@item c
@c Continue editing the already started outgoing message (@code{rmail-continue}).
書き始めたメッセージの編集を再開する（@code{rmail-continue}）。
@item r
@c Send a reply to the current Rmail message (@code{rmail-reply}).
カレントメッセージに対する返事を送信する（@code{rmail-reply}）。
@item f
@c Forward the current message to other users (@code{rmail-forward}).
カレントメッセージを他のユーザーに転送する（@code{rmail-forward}）。
@item C-u f
@c Resend the current message to other users (@code{rmail-resend}).
カレントメッセージを他のユーザーに再送信する（@code{rmail-resend}）。
@item M-m
@c Try sending a bounced message a second time (@code{rmail-retry-failure}).
送信できずに戻ってきたメッセージを再度送信する
（@code{rmail-retry-failure}）。
@end table

@c @kindex r @r{(Rmail)}
@kindex r @r{（rmail）}
@findex rmail-reply
@c @cindex reply to a message
@cindex メッセージへの返信
@c   The most common reason to send a message while in Rmail is to reply to
@c the message you are reading.  To do this, type @kbd{r}
@c (@code{rmail-reply}).  This displays the @samp{*mail*} buffer in another
@c window, much like @kbd{C-x 4 m}, but preinitializes the @samp{Subject},
@c @samp{To}, @samp{CC} and @samp{In-reply-to} header fields based on the
@c message you are replying to.  The @samp{To} field starts out as the
@c address of the person who sent the message you received, and the
@c @samp{CC} field starts out with all the other recipients of that
@c message.
rmailからメッセージを送信するのは、ほとんどの場合、
読んでいるメッセージに返信するためでしょう。
それには、@kbd{r}（@code{rmail-reply}）と打ちます。
すると、@kbd{C-x 4 m}のように
別のウィンドウに@samp{*mail*}バッファが表示されますが、
返事を出そうとするメッセージに基づいて
@samp{Subject}、@samp{To}、@samp{CC}、@samp{In-reply-to}の
ヘッダフィールドがあらかじめ埋められています。
@samp{To}フィールドにはそのメッセージの送信者が書かれ、
@samp{CC}フィールドにはそのメッセージのすべての受信者が書かれます。

@vindex rmail-dont-reply-to-names
@c   You can exclude certain recipients from being placed automatically in
@c the @samp{CC}, using the variable @code{rmail-dont-reply-to-names}.  Its
@c value should be a regular expression (as a string); any recipient that
@c the regular expression matches, is excluded from the @samp{CC} field.
@c The default value matches your own name, and any name starting with
@c @samp{info-}.  (Those names are excluded because there is a convention
@c of using them for large mailing lists to broadcast announcements.)
変数@code{rmail-dont-reply-to-names}を使うと、
@samp{CC}に自動的に含まれる受信者から特定の受信者を除くことができます。
この変数の値は（文字列で表した）正規表現である必要があります。
この正規表現に一致する受信者は@samp{CC}フィールドから除かれます。
デフォルトの値は、あなた自身の名前と@samp{info-}で始まる名前です。
（このような名前は、
大規模なメイリングリストで全員に送信するために使う習慣があるから。）

@c   To omit the @samp{CC} field completely for a particular reply, enter
@c the reply command with a numeric argument: @kbd{C-u r} or @kbd{1 r}.
@samp{CC}フィールドを完全に省いて返信したいときには、
数引数を指定して返信コマンドを入力します。
つまり、@kbd{C-u r}や@kbd{1 r}です。

@c   Once the @samp{*mail*} buffer has been initialized, editing and
@c sending the mail goes as usual (@pxref{Sending Mail}).  You can edit the
@c presupplied header fields if they are not right for you.  You can also
@c use the commands of Mail mode (@pxref{Mail Mode}), including @kbd{C-c
@c C-y} which yanks in the message that you are replying to.  You can
@c switch to the Rmail buffer, select a different message there, switch
@c back, and yank the new current message.
ひとたび@samp{*mail*}バッファが初期化されれば、
メイルの編集や送信は通常どおりです
（@pxref{Sending Mail}）。
あらかじめ用意されたヘッダフィールドが適切でなければ、
編集してかまいません。
また、メイル（mail）モードのコマンドを使うこともでき
（@pxref{Mail Mode}）、
@kbd{C-c C-y}コマンドでもとの返信メッセージをヤンクすることもできます。
rmailバッファに切り替えてから別のメッセージを選択し、
もとに戻って新しいカレントメッセージをヤンクしてもかまいません。

@c @kindex M-m @r{(Rmail)}
@kindex M-m @r{（rmail）}
@findex rmail-retry-failure
@c @cindex retrying a failed message
@cindex 失敗したメッセージの再送信
@vindex rmail-retry-ignored-headers
@c   Sometimes a message does not reach its destination.  Mailers usually
@c send the failed message back to you, enclosed in a @dfn{failure
@c message}.  The Rmail command @kbd{M-m} (@code{rmail-retry-failure})
@c prepares to send the same message a second time: it sets up a
@c @samp{*mail*} buffer with the same text and header fields as before.  If
@c you type @kbd{C-c C-c} right away, you send the message again exactly
@c the same as the first time.  Alternatively, you can edit the text or
@c headers and then send it.  The variable
@c @code{rmail-retry-ignored-headers}, in the same format as
@c @code{rmail-ignored-headers} (@pxref{Rmail Display}), controls which
@c headers are stripped from the failed message when retrying it; it
@c defaults to @code{nil}.
メッセージが相手先へ届かない場合があります。
メイル配送プログラムは、通常、
失敗したメッセージを@dfn{失敗メッセージ}に同封して
発信者に送り返します。
rmailのコマンド@kbd{M-m}（@code{rmail-retry-failure}）は、
同じメッセージを再送する準備をします。
前回と同じ本文とヘッダフィールドで@samp{*mail*}バッファを立ち上げます。
すぐに@kbd{C-c C-c}と打つと、
前回とまったく同様にメッセージを再送信します。
あるいは、本文やヘッダを編集してから送信することもできます。
変数@code{rmail-ignored-headers}（@pxref{Rmail Display}）と同じ形式の
変数@code{rmail-retry-ignored-headers}は、
再送信するときに送信に失敗したメッセージから取り除くヘッダを制御します。
デフォルトでは@code{nil}です。

@c @kindex f @r{(Rmail)}
@kindex f @r{（rmail）}
@findex rmail-forward
@c @cindex forwarding a message
@cindex メッセージの転送
@c   Another frequent reason to send mail in Rmail is to @dfn{forward} the
@c current message to other users.  @kbd{f} (@code{rmail-forward}) makes
@c this easy by preinitializing the @samp{*mail*} buffer with the current
@c message as the text, and a subject designating a forwarded message.  All
@c you have to do is fill in the recipients and send.  When you forward a
@c message, recipients get a message which is ``from'' you, and which has
@c the original message in its contents.
rmailからメッセージを送信する別の場面は、
他のユーザーにメッセージを@dfn{転送}（forward）することでしょう。
@kbd{f}（@code{rmail-forward}）はこれを簡単に行えるようにします。
つまり、カレントメッセージをテキストとして@samp{*mail*}バッファを初期化し、
@samp{Subject}も転送メッセージである旨の初期化をします。
あとは、受信者を埋め込んで送信するだけです。
メッセージを転送したとき、受信者はあなた『から』メッセージを受け取りますが、
内容はもとのメッセージのままです。

@findex unforward-rmail-message
@c   Forwarding a message encloses it between two delimiter lines.  It also
@c modifies every line that starts with a dash, by inserting @w{@samp{- }}
@c at the start of the line.  When you receive a forwarded message, if it
@c contains something besides ordinary text---for example, program source
@c code---you might find it useful to undo that transformation.  You can do
@c this by selecting the forwarded message and typing @kbd{M-x
@c unforward-rmail-message}.  This command extracts the original forwarded
@c message, deleting the inserted @w{@samp{- }} strings, and inserts it
@c into the Rmail file as a separate message immediately following the
@c current one.
転送されるメッセージは、2つの区切り行に挟まれています。
また、各行は、行頭に@w{@samp{- }}を挿入してハイフンで始まるように
修正されます。
転送メッセージを受け取って、たとえばプログラムのソースコードのように
文書以外に何か役立つようなものが含まれているときには、
このような変更をもとに戻せたら便利です。
これを行うには、転送メッセージを選択して
@kbd{M-x unforward-rmail-message}と打ちます。
このコマンドは、挿入された@w{@samp{- }}を削除してもとのメッセージを取り出し、
それをrmailファイルのカレントメッセージの直後に別のメッセージとして挿入します。

@findex rmail-resend
@c   @dfn{Resending} is an alternative similar to forwarding; the
@c difference is that resending sends a message that is ``from'' the
@c original sender, just as it reached you---with a few added header fields
@c @samp{Resent-from} and @samp{Resent-to} to indicate that it came via
@c you.  To resend a message in Rmail, use @kbd{C-u f}.  (@kbd{f} runs
@c @code{rmail-forward}, which is programmed to invoke @code{rmail-resend}
@c if you provide a numeric argument.)
@dfn{再送}（resending）は転送に似ている別の手段です。
異なる点は、再送はもともとの送信者『から』メッセージをもう一度送ることです。
また、あなたから送られたことを示すために
@samp{Resent-from}と@samp{Resent-to}のヘッダフィールドが付加されます。
rmailでメッセージを再送するには、@kbd{C-u f}を使います。
（@kbd{f}は@code{rmail-forward}を実行するが、
数引数を指定すると@code{rmail-resend}を実行するようになっている。）

@c @kindex m @r{(Rmail)}
@kindex m @r{（rmail）}
@findex rmail-mail
@c   The @kbd{m} (@code{rmail-mail}) command is used to start editing an
@c outgoing message that is not a reply.  It leaves the header fields empty.
@c Its only difference from @kbd{C-x 4 m} is that it makes the Rmail buffer
@c accessible for @kbd{C-c C-y}, just as @kbd{r} does.  Thus, @kbd{m} can be
@c used to reply to or forward a message; it can do anything @kbd{r} or @kbd{f}
@c can do.@refill
@kbd{m}（@code{rmail-mail}）コマンドは、
返信ではない送信メッセージを編集し始めるのに使います。
ヘッダフィールドは空のままです。
このコマンドと@kbd{C-x 4 m}との唯一の違いは、
ちょうど@kbd{r}がするように
@kbd{C-c C-y}でrmailバッファを参照できるようにすることです。
したがって、@kbd{m}コマンドでメッセージに返信したり転送したりできます。
@kbd{r}や@kbd{f}でできることは何でもできます。

@c @kindex c @r{(Rmail)}
@kindex c @r{（rmail）}
@findex rmail-continue
@c   The @kbd{c} (@code{rmail-continue}) command resumes editing the
@c @samp{*mail*} buffer, to finish editing an outgoing message you were
@c already composing, or to alter a message you have sent.@refill
@kbd{c}（@code{rmail-continue}）コマンドは、
書きかけのメッセージの編集を完了したり、
送信したメッセージを変更したりするために
@samp{*mail*}バッファの編集を再開します。

@vindex rmail-mail-new-frame
@c   If you set the variable @code{rmail-mail-new-frame} to a
@c non-@code{nil} value, then all the Rmail commands to start sending a
@c message create a new frame to edit it in.  This frame is deleted when
@c you send the message, or when you use the @samp{Don't Send} item in the
@c @samp{Mail} menu.
変数@code{rmail-mail-new-frame}に@code{nil}以外の値を設定すると、
メッセージの送信を始めるすべてのrmailコマンドは編集用に新しいフレームを
作ります。
メッセージを送信したり@samp{Mail}メニューの項目@samp{Don't Send}を使うと、
このフレームは削除されます。

@c   All the Rmail commands to send a message use the mail-composition
@c method that you have chosen (@pxref{Mail Methods}).
メッセージを送信するためすべてのrmailコマンドは、
あなたが選択したメイル作成方式を使います
（@pxref{Mail Methods}）。

@node Rmail Summary
@c @section Summaries
@section rmailのサマリ機能
@c @cindex summary (Rmail)
@cindex サマリ（rmail）

@c   A @dfn{summary} is a buffer containing one line per message to give
@c you an overview of the mail in an Rmail file.  Each line shows the
@c message number, the sender, the labels, and the subject.  Almost all
@c Rmail commands are valid in the summary buffer also; these apply to the
@c message described by the current line of the summary.  Moving point in
@c the summary buffer selects messages as you move to their summary lines.
@dfn{サマリ}（summary）とは、
rmailファイルにあるメイルの概要を示すために
1メッセージにつき1行の情報を収めたバッファです。
各行には、メッセージ番号、送信者、ラベル、
サブジェクト（@samp{Subject}の内容）が表示されます。
ほとんどすべてのrmailコマンドはサマリバッファでも有効で、
サマリの現在行が指すメッセージに適用されます。
サマリバッファでポイントを動かすと、
ポイントがある行が指すメッセージを選択します。

@c   A summary buffer applies to a single Rmail file only; if you are
@c editing multiple Rmail files, each one can have its own summary buffer.
@c The summary buffer name is made by appending @samp{-summary} to the
@c Rmail buffer's name.  Normally only one summary buffer is displayed at a
@c time.
1つのサマリバッファは、それに対応した1つのrmailファイルにしか適用されません。
複数のrmailファイルを編集している場合には、
それぞれに専用のサマリバッファを作れます。
サマリバッファの名前は、rmailバッファの名前に@samp{-summary}を
付け加えたものです。
通常、一度に表示されるサマリバッファは1つだけです。

@menu
* Rmail Make Summary::	     Making various sorts of summaries.
* Rmail Summary Edit::	     Manipulating messages from the summary.
@end menu

@node Rmail Make Summary
@c @subsection Making Summaries
@subsection サマリの作成

@c   Here are the commands to create a summary for the current Rmail file.
@c Once the Rmail file has a summary buffer, changes in the Rmail file
@c (such as deleting or expunging messages, and getting new mail)
@c automatically update the summary.
現在のrmailファイルのサマリを作成するコマンドを説明します。
いったんrmailファイルに対するサマリバッファを作っておくと、
（メッセージの削除／抹消、新着メイルの取得などで）
rmailファイルが変更されると自動的にサマリも更新されます。

@table @kbd
@item h
@itemx C-M-h
@c Summarize all messages (@code{rmail-summary}).
すべてのメッセージのサマリを作成する（@code{rmail-summary}）。
@item l @var{labels} @key{RET}
@itemx C-M-l @var{labels} @key{RET}
@c Summarize messages that have one or more of the specified labels
@c (@code{rmail-summary-by-labels}).
指定したラベルのいずれかを含むメッセージのサマリを作成する
（@code{rmail-summary-by-labels}）。
@item C-M-r @var{rcpts} @key{RET}
@c Summarize messages that have one or more of the specified recipients
@c (@code{rmail-summary-by-recipients}).
指定した受信者名のいずれかを含むメッセージのサマリを作成する
（@code{rmail-summary-by-recipients}）。
@item C-M-t @var{topic} @key{RET}
@c Summarize messages that have a match for the specified regexp
@c @var{topic} in their subjects (@code{rmail-summary-by-topic}).
指定した正規表現@var{topic}に一致するサブジェクトを持つ
メッセージのサマリを作成する（@code{rmail-summary-by-topic}）。
@end table

@c @kindex h @r{(Rmail)}
@kindex h @r{（rmail）}
@findex rmail-summary
@c   The @kbd{h} or @kbd{C-M-h} (@code{rmail-summary}) command fills the summary buffer
@c for the current Rmail file with a summary of all the messages in the file.
@c It then displays and selects the summary buffer in another window.
コマンド@kbd{h}や@kbd{C-M-h}（@code{rmail-summary}）は、
現在のrmailファイルのサマリバッファを
このファイルの全メッセージのサマリで満たします。
そして、別のウィンドウにサマリバッファを表示し選択します。

@c @kindex l @r{(Rmail)}
@c @kindex C-M-l @r{(Rmail)}
@kindex l @r{（rmail）}
@kindex C-M-l @r{（rmail）}
@findex rmail-summary-by-labels
@c   @kbd{C-M-l @var{labels} @key{RET}} (@code{rmail-summary-by-labels}) makes
@c a partial summary mentioning only the messages that have one or more of the
@c labels @var{labels}.  @var{labels} should contain label names separated by
@c commas.@refill
@kbd{C-M-l @var{labels} @key{RET}}（@code{rmail-summary-by-labels}）は、
ラベル@var{labels}のいずれかを含むメッセージに対する部分的なサマリを作ります。
@var{labels}はラベル名をコンマで区切ったものである必要があります。

@c @kindex C-M-r @r{(Rmail)}
@kindex C-M-r @r{（rmail）}
@findex rmail-summary-by-recipients
@c   @kbd{C-M-r @var{rcpts} @key{RET}} (@code{rmail-summary-by-recipients})
@c makes a partial summary mentioning only the messages that have one or more
@c of the recipients @var{rcpts}.  @var{rcpts} should contain mailing
@c addresses separated by commas.@refill
@kbd{C-M-r @var{rcpts} @key{RET}}（@code{rmail-summary-by-recipients}）は、
受信者名@var{rcpts}のいずれかを含むメッセージに対する部分的な
サマリを作ります。
@var{rcpts}はメイルアドレスをコンマで区切ったものである必要があります。

@c @kindex C-M-t @r{(Rmail)}
@kindex C-M-t @r{（rmail）}
@findex rmail-summary-by-topic
@c   @kbd{C-M-t @var{topic} @key{RET}} (@code{rmail-summary-by-topic})
@c makes a partial summary mentioning only the messages whose subjects have
@c a match for the regular expression @var{topic}.
@kbd{C-M-t @var{topic} @key{RET}}（@code{rmail-summary-by-topic}）は、
正規表現@var{topic}に一致するサブジェクトを持つメッセージに対する
部分的なサマリを作成します。

@c   Note that there is only one summary buffer for any Rmail file; making one
@c kind of summary discards any previously made summary.
どのrmailファイルにも1つのサマリバッファしかないことに注意してください。
ある種類のサマリを作成すると、それ以前のサマリは消されてしまいます。

@vindex rmail-summary-window-size
@vindex rmail-summary-line-count-flag
@c   The variable @code{rmail-summary-window-size} says how many lines to
@c use for the summary window.  The variable
@c @code{rmail-summary-line-count-flag} controls whether the summary line
@c for a message should include the line count of the message.
変数@code{rmail-summary-window-size}は、
サマリウィンドウに使う行数を指定します。
変数@code{rmail-summary-line-count-flag} は、
各メッセージのサマリ行にメッセージの行数を表示するかどうかを制御します。

@node Rmail Summary Edit
@c @subsection Editing in Summaries
@subsection サマリでの編集

@c   You can use the Rmail summary buffer to do almost anything you can do
@c in the Rmail buffer itself.  In fact, once you have a summary buffer,
@c there's no need to switch back to the Rmail buffer.
rmailバッファ自体にできることは、
rmailサマリバッファでもほとんどできます。
実際、いったんサマリバッファを作っておけば、
rmailバッファに切り替える必要はありません。

@c   You can select and display various messages in the Rmail buffer, from
@c the summary buffer, just by moving point in the summary buffer to
@c different lines.  It doesn't matter what Emacs command you use to move
@c point; whichever line point is on at the end of the command, that
@c message is selected in the Rmail buffer.
サマリバッファ上でポイントを行から行へ移動するだけで、
サマリバッファからrmailバッファのさまざまなメッセージを選択し表示できます。
どんなEmacsコマンドを使ってポイントを移動してもかまいません。
コマンドを実行し終ったときにポイントがある行がどこであっても、
rmailバッファのそれに対応するメッセージが選択されます。

@c   Almost all Rmail commands work in the summary buffer as well as in the
@c Rmail buffer.  Thus, @kbd{d} in the summary buffer deletes the current
@c message, @kbd{u} undeletes, and @kbd{x} expunges.  @kbd{o} and @kbd{C-o}
@c output the current message to a file; @kbd{r} starts a reply to it.  You
@c can scroll the current message while remaining in the summary buffer
@c using @key{SPC} and @key{DEL}.
ほとんどすべてのrmailコマンドは、rmailバッファと同様にサマリバッファ
でも機能します。
つまり、
@kbd{d}はサマリバッファでもカレントメッセージを削除し、
@kbd{u}はアンデリートし、@kbd{x}は抹消します。
@kbd{o}と@kbd{C-o}はカレントメッセージをファイルに書き込みます。
@kbd{r}は返信を開始します。
サマリバッファにいても、
@key{SPC}と@key{DEL}を使ってカレントメッセージをスクロールできます。

@c   The Rmail commands to move between messages also work in the summary
@c buffer, but with a twist: they move through the set of messages included
@c in the summary.  They also ensure the Rmail buffer appears on the screen
@c (unlike cursor motion commands, which update the contents of the Rmail
@c buffer but don't display it in a window unless it already appears).
@c Here is a list of these commands:
メッセージのあいだを移動するrmailコマンドもサマリバッファで使えますが、
事情が少々違っています。
つまり、現在サマリが作られているメッセージのあいだでしか移動できません。
また、rmailバッファが必ず画面に表示されるようにします。
（カーソル移動のコマンドはrmailバッファの内容を更新しますが、
rmailバッファがウィンドウに表示されていなければ表示されません。）
以下はこれらのコマンドの一覧です。

@table @kbd
@item n
@c Move to next line, skipping lines saying `deleted', and select its
@c message.
（削除された）「deleted」となっている行を
飛び越してつぎの行に移動し、そのメッセージを選択する。
@item p
@c Move to previous line, skipping lines saying `deleted', and select
@c its message.
（削除された）「deleted」となっている行を
飛び越してまえの行に移動し、そのメッセージを選択する。
@item M-n
@c Move to next line and select its message.
つぎの行に移動し、そのメッセージを選択する。
@item M-p
@c Move to previous line and select its message.
まえの行に移動し、そのメッセージを選択する。
@item >
@c Move to the last line, and select its message.
最後の行に移動し、そのメッセージを選択する。
@item <
@c Move to the first line, and select its message.
最初の行に移動し、そのメッセージを選択する。
@item M-s @var{pattern} @key{RET}
@c Search through messages for @var{pattern} starting with the current
@c message; select the message found, and move point in the summary buffer
@c to that message's line.
カレントメッセージから始めて@var{pattern}に一致するメッセージを探索する。
みつかったメッセージを選択し、
サマリバッファ内のそのメッセージに対応する行にポイントを移動する。
@end table

@vindex rmail-redisplay-summary
@c   Deletion, undeletion, and getting new mail, and even selection of a
@c different message all update the summary buffer when you do them in the
@c Rmail buffer.  If the variable @code{rmail-redisplay-summary} is
@c non-@code{nil}, these actions also bring the summary buffer back onto
@c the screen.
rmailバッファで、削除、アンデリート、新着メイルの取得、
別のメッセージの選択を実行すると、サマリバッファを必ず更新します。
変数@code{rmail-redisplay-summary}が@code{nil}以外ならば、
これらのコマンドを実行するとサマリバッファは画面に表示されます。

@c @kindex Q @r{(Rmail summary)}
@kindex Q @r{（rmailサマリ）}
@findex rmail-summary-wipe
@c @kindex q @r{(Rmail summary)}
@kindex q @r{（rmailサマリ）}
@findex rmail-summary-quit
@c   When you are finished using the summary, type @kbd{Q}
@c (@code{rmail-summary-wipe}) to delete the summary buffer's window.  You
@c can also exit Rmail while in the summary: @kbd{q}
@c (@code{rmail-summary-quit}) deletes the summary window, then exits from
@c Rmail by saving the Rmail file and switching to another buffer.
サマリを使い終ったら@kbd{Q}（@code{rmail-summary-wipe}）と打って
サマリバッファのウィンドウを削除します。
サマリでrmailを終了することもできます。
@kbd{q}（@code{rmail-summary-quit}）はサマリウィンドウを削除し、
rmailファイルを保存してrmailを抜け、別のバッファに切り替えます。

@node Rmail Sorting
@c @section Sorting the Rmail File
@section rmailファイルのソート

@table @kbd
@item M-x rmail-sort-by-date
@c Sort messages of current Rmail file by date.
現在のrmailファイルのメッセージを日付順にソートする。

@item M-x rmail-sort-by-subject
@c Sort messages of current Rmail file by subject.
現在のrmailファイルのメッセージを@samp{Subject}順にソートする。

@item M-x rmail-sort-by-author
@c Sort messages of current Rmail file by author's name.
現在のrmailファイルのメッセージを筆者名順にソートする。

@item M-x rmail-sort-by-recipient
@c Sort messages of current Rmail file by recipient's names.
現在のrmailファイルのメッセージを受け手名順にソートする。

@item M-x rmail-sort-by-correspondent
@c Sort messages of current Rmail file by the name of the other
@c correspondent.
現在のrmailファイルのメッセージを他の文通者名順にソートする。

@item M-x rmail-sort-by-lines
@c Sort messages of current Rmail file by size (number of lines).
現在のrmailファイルのメッセージを行数順にソートする。

@item M-x rmail-sort-by-keywords @key{RET} @var{labels} @key{RET}
@c Sort messages of current Rmail file by labels.  The argument
@c @var{labels} should be a comma-separated list of labels.  The order of
@c these labels specifies the order of messages; messages with the first
@c label come first, messages with the second label come second, and so on.
@c Messages which have none of these labels come last.
現在のrmailファイルのメッセージをラベル順にソートする。
引数 @var{labels}は、コンマで区切られたラベルの並びである必要がある。
ラベルの順序がメッセージの順序を決める。
最初のラベルを持つメッセージが最初にきて、
2番目のラベルを持つものが2番目にくるというようになる。
指定したラベルも持たないメッセージは最後にくる。
@end table

@c   The Rmail sort commands perform a @emph{stable sort}: if there is no
@c reason to prefer either one of two messages, their order remains
@c unchanged.  You can use this to sort by more than one criterion.  For
@c example, if you use @code{rmail-sort-by-date} and then
@c @code{rmail-sort-by-author}, messages from the same author appear in
@c order by date.
rmailのソートコマンドは、@emph{順序を保存するソート}（stable sort）を行います。
2つのメッセージのどちらを先にするか明確な基準がないときには、
その順序関係は保存されます。
これを用いれば、複数の基準でソートできます。
たとえば、@code{rmail-sort-by-date}を使ってから
@code{rmail-sort-by-author}を使うと、
同じ筆者のメッセージは日付順に並びます。

@c   With a numeric argument, all these commands reverse the order of
@c comparison.  This means they sort messages from newest to oldest, from
@c biggest to smallest, or in reverse alphabetical order.
数引数を指定するとこれらのすべてのコマンドは逆順序に並べます。
つまり、新しいものから古いものへ、大きなものから小さなものへ、
アルファベットの逆順にメッセージをソートします。

@node Rmail Display
@c @section Display of Messages
@section メッセージの表示

@c   Rmail reformats the header of each message before displaying it for
@c the first time.  Reformatting hides uninteresting header fields to
@c reduce clutter.  You can use the @kbd{t} command to show the entire
@c header or to repeat the header reformatting operation.
初めてメッセージを表示するとき、rmailはメッセージのヘッダを
整形し直してから表示します。
むだな表示を削るために重要でないヘッダフィールドを隠します。
@kbd{t}コマンドを使うと、ヘッダ全体を表示したり再度整形することができます。

@table @kbd
@item t
@c Toggle display of complete header (@code{rmail-toggle-header}).
ヘッダ全体を表示するかどうかを切り替える（@code{rmail-toggle-header}）。
@end table

@vindex rmail-ignored-headers
@c   Reformatting the header involves deleting most header fields, on the
@c grounds that they are not interesting.  The variable
@c @code{rmail-ignored-headers} holds a regular expression that specifies
@c which header fields to hide in this way---if it matches the beginning of
@c a header field, that whole field is hidden.
ヘッダの整形では、各ヘッダフィールドの重要性に基づいて
ほとんどのヘッダフィールドを削除することになります。
変数@code{rmail-ignored-headers}には、このようにして隠すヘッダフィールドを
指定する正規表現を記述します。
ヘッダフィールドの先頭部分がこの正規表現に一致すると
そのフィールド全体を隠します。

@c @kindex t @r{(Rmail)}
@kindex t @r{（rmail）}
@findex rmail-toggle-header
@c   Rmail saves the complete original header before reformatting; to see
@c it, use the @kbd{t} command (@code{rmail-toggle-header}).  This
@c discards the reformatted headers of the current message and displays it
@c with the original header.  Repeating @kbd{t} reformats the message
@c again.  Selecting the message again also reformats.
rmailは整形を行うまえにもとのヘッダ全体を保存します。
これを見るには@kbd{t}（@code{rmail-toggle-header}）コマンドを使います。
カレントメッセージの整形されたヘッダを捨て、もとのヘッダを表示します。
@kbd{t}を再度実行すると、メッセージのヘッダを再度整形します。
メッセージを選択し直しても再度整形します。

@c   One consequence of this is that if you edit the reformatted header
@c (using @kbd{e}; @pxref{Rmail Editing}), subsequent use of @kbd{t} will
@c discard your edits.  On the other hand, if you use @kbd{e} after
@c @kbd{t}, to edit the original (unreformatted) header, those changes are
@c permanent.
この結果として、（@pxref{Rmail Editing}）
整形されたヘッダを（@kbd{e}コマンドで）編集しても、
そのあとに@kbd{t}を使うと編集したものは破棄されます（@pxref{Rmail Editing}）。
一方、@kbd{t}のあとに@kbd{e}を使って
もとの（整形していない）ヘッダを編集すると、その変更は保存されます。

@c   When the @kbd{t} command has a prefix argument, a positive argument
@c means to show the reformatted header, and a zero or negative argument
@c means to show the full header.
@kbd{t}コマンドに数引数を付けると、
正の引数ならは整形したヘッダを表示し、
ゼロか負ならばヘッダ全体を表示します。

@vindex rmail-highlighted-headers
@c   When used with a window system that supports multiple fonts, Rmail
@c highlights certain header fields that are especially interesting---by
@c default, the @samp{From} and @samp{Subject} fields.  The variable
@c @code{rmail-highlighted-headers} holds a regular expression that
@c specifies the header fields to highlight; if it matches the beginning of
@c a header field, that whole field is highlighted.
複数のフォントを使えるウィンドウシステムで使用すると、
rmailは特に重要なある種のヘッダフィールドを強調表示します。
デフォルトでは、 @samp{From}フィールドと@samp{Subject}フィールドです。
変数@code{rmail-highlighted-headers}には、強調表示したいヘッダフィールドを
指定する正規表現を記述します。
ヘッダフィールドの先頭部分がこの正規表現に一致すると
そのフィールド全体を強調表示します。

@c   If you specify unusual colors for your text foreground and background,
@c the colors used for highlighting may not go well with them.  If so,
@c specify different colors for the @code{highlight} face.  That is worth
@c doing because the @code{highlight} face is used for other kinds of
@c highlighting as well.  @xref{Faces}, for how to do this.
テキストの前景や背景に標準的でない色を指定すると、
うまく強調表示できないこともあります。
そのような場合には、@code{highlight}フェイスに別の色を指定します。
@code{highlight}フェイスはrmail以外の強調表示にも使われるので、
指定を行う価値があります。
方法は、@xref{Faces}。

@c   To turn off highlighting entirely in Rmail, set
@c @code{rmail-highlighted-headers} to @code{nil}.
rmailの強調表示をすべてやめるには、
変数@code{rmail-highlighted-headers}に@code{nil}を設定してください。

@node Rmail Editing
@c @section Editing Within a Message
@section メッセージの編集

@c   Most of the usual Emacs commands are available in Rmail mode, though a
@c few, such as @kbd{C-M-n} and @kbd{C-M-h}, are redefined by Rmail for
@c other purposes.  However, the Rmail buffer is normally read only, and
@c most of the letters are redefined as Rmail commands.  If you want to
@c edit the text of a message, you must use the Rmail command @kbd{e}.
rmailモードでも通常のEmacsコマンドのほとんどを使えますが、
@kbd{C-M-n}や@kbd{C-M-h}のように他の目的のためにrmailで再定義された
ものもいくつかあります。
しかし、rmail バッファは通常読み出し専用であり、
アルファベット文字のほとんどもrmailコマンドとして再定義されています。
メッセージのテキストを編集したいときには、
rmailコマンド@kbd{e}を使う必要があります。

@table @kbd
@item e
@c Edit the current message as ordinary text.
カレントメッセージを通常のテキストとして編集する。
@end table

@c @kindex e @r{(Rmail)}
@kindex e @r{（rmail）}
@findex rmail-edit-current-message
@c   The @kbd{e} command (@code{rmail-edit-current-message}) switches from
@c Rmail mode into Rmail Edit mode, another major mode which is nearly the
@c same as Text mode.  The mode line indicates this change.
@kbd{e}（@code{rmail-edit-current-message}）コマンドは、
rmailモードからrmail編集（rmail-edit）モードに移行します。
このモードは、テキスト（text）モードとほとんど同じ別のメジャーモードです。
モード行にこの変化が表示されます。

@c   In Rmail Edit mode, letters insert themselves as usual and the Rmail
@c commands are not available.  When you are finished editing the message and
@c are ready to go back to Rmail, type @kbd{C-c C-c}, which switches back to
@c Rmail mode.  Alternatively, you can return to Rmail mode but cancel all the
@c editing that you have done, by typing @kbd{C-c C-]}.
rmail編集（rmail-edit）モードでは、文字は通常どおり挿入でき、
rmailコマンドは使えません。
メッセージを編集し終えてrmailへ戻るには、
@kbd{C-c C-c}と打ちます。
するとrmailモードに戻ります。
あるいは、行った編集をすべて取り消してrmailモードに戻るには、
@kbd{C-c C-]}と打ちます。

@vindex rmail-edit-mode-hook
@c   Entering Rmail Edit mode runs the hook @code{text-mode-hook}; then it
@c runs the hook @code{rmail-edit-mode-hook} (@pxref{Hooks}).  It adds the
@c attribute @samp{edited} to the message.  It also displays the full
@c headers of the message, so that you can edit the headers as well as the
@c body of the message, and your changes in the the headers will be
@c permanent.
rmail編集（rmail-edit）モードに入るとき、
フック@code{text-mode-hook}が実行されます。
それからフック@code{rmail-edit-mode-hook} が実行されます 
（@pxref{Hooks}）。
メッセージには属性@samp{edited} が付けられます。
さらに、メッセージのヘッダ全体が表示されるので、
メッセージの本文と同様にヘッダも編集できます。
ヘッダに対する変更も保存されます。

@node Rmail Digest
@c @section Digest Messages
@section ダイジェストメッセージ
@c @cindex digest message
@c @cindex undigestify
@cindex ダイジェストメッセージ
@cindex アンダイジェスト

@c   A @dfn{digest message} is a message which exists to contain and carry
@c several other messages.  Digests are used on some moderated mailing
@c lists; all the messages that arrive for the list during a period of time
@c such as one day are put inside a single digest which is then sent to the
@c subscribers.  Transmitting the single digest uses much less computer
@c time than transmitting the individual messages even though the total
@c size is the same, because the per-message overhead in network mail
@c transmission is considerable.
@dfn{ダイジェストメッセージ}（digest message）は、
数個のメッセージをまとめて運ぶためのメッセージです。
ダイジェストは管理人のいるメイリングリスト上で使われます。
1日単位などの一定期間内にリスト宛に受け取ったすべてのメッセージを
1つのダイジェストにまとめて加入者に送ります。
合計のサイズが同じであったとしても、ダイジェストにして送るほうが
個々にメッセージを送るよりコンピュータの使用時間がずっと少なくてすみます。
というのは、メイル送信に必要なメッセージあたりのネットワーク上の
オーバーヘッドがとても大きいからです。

@findex undigestify-rmail-message
@c   When you receive a digest message, the most convenient way to read it is
@c to @dfn{undigestify} it: to turn it back into many individual messages.
@c Then you can read and delete the individual messages as it suits you.
ダイジェストメッセージを受け取ったならば、
もっとも簡単な読み方は、それを@dfn{アンダイジェスト}（undigestify）して
個々のメッセージに戻すことです。
そうすれば好きなように、個々のメッセージを読んだり削除したりできます。

@c   To do this, select the digest message and type the command @kbd{M-x
@c undigestify-rmail-message}.  This extracts the submessages as separate
@c Rmail messages, and inserts them following the digest.  The digest
@c message itself is flagged as deleted.
アンダイジェストするには、ダイジェストメッセージを選び、
コマンド@kbd{M-x undigestify-rmail-message}を打ちます。
これは、（ダイジェストメッセージ内の）サブメッセージを別々の
rmailメッセージとして取り出し、ダイジェストのあとに
それらのメッセージを挿入します。
ダイジェストメッセージ自体は削除されます。

@node Out of Rmail
@c @section Converting an Rmail File to Inbox Format
@section rmailファイルからinbox形式への変換

@findex unrmail
@c   The command @kbd{M-x unrmail} converts a file in Rmail format to inbox
@c format (also known as the system mailbox format), so that you can use it
@c with other mail-editing tools.  You must specify two arguments, the name
@c of the Rmail file and the name to use for the converted file.  @kbd{M-x
@c unrmail} does not alter the Rmail file itself.
コマンド @kbd{M-x unrmail}は、rmail形式のファイルを
（システムのメイルボックス形式としても知られる）inbox形式に変換します。
こうすると、そのファイルを別のメイル編集ツールでも使えるようになります。
2つの引数、rmailファイル名と変換後のファイル名を指定する必要があります。
@kbd{M-x unrmail}はrmailファイル自体には変更を加えません。

@node Rmail Rot13
@c @section Reading Rot13 Messages
@section rot13メッセージの読み方
@c @cindex rot13 code
@cindex rot13暗号

@c   Mailing list messages that might offend some readers are sometimes
@c encoded in a simple code called @dfn{rot13}---so named because it
@c rotates the alphabet by 13 letters.  This code is not for secrecy, as it
@c provides none; rather, it enables those who might be offended to avoid
@c ever seeing the real text of the message.
特定の読者に不快を与える可能性があるメイリングリストのメッセージは、
@dfn{rot13}と呼ばれる単純な方法で暗号化してある場合があります。
この名前は、アルファベットを13文字分巡回させることに由来します。
これは機密保持のためではなく、そのような機能もありません。
不快に感じるかもしれない読者が
メッセージの本当の本文を見ないようにするために使います。

@findex rot13-other-window
@c   To view a buffer using the rot13 code, use the command @kbd{M-x
@c rot13-other-window}.  This displays the current buffer in another window
@c which applies the code when displaying the text.
rot13暗号を使っているバッファを見るには、
コマンド@kbd{M-x rot13-other-window}を使います。
テキストを表示するときに暗号を解いて
別のウィンドウにカレントバッファを表示します。

@node Movemail
@c @section @code{movemail} and POP
@section @code{movemail}とPOP
@c @cindex @code{movemail} program
@cindex @code{movemail}プログラム

@vindex rmail-preserve-inbox
@c   When getting new mail, Rmail first copies the new mail from the inbox
@c file to the Rmail file; then it saves the Rmail file; then it truncates
@c the inbox file.  This way, a system crash may cause duplication of mail
@c between the inbox and the Rmail file, but cannot lose mail.  If
@c @code{rmail-preserve-inbox} is non-@code{nil}, then Rmail will copy new
@c mail from the inbox file to the Rmail file without truncating the inbox
@c file.  You may wish to set this, for example, on a portable computer you
@c use to check your mail via POP while traveling, so that your mail will
@c remain on the server and you can save it later on your workstation.
新着メイルを取得するとき、rmailはまずinboxファイルからrmailファイルに
新着メイルをコピーします。
それから、rmailファイルを保存します。
そして、inboxファイルの内容を消します。
こうすると、システムがクラッシュするとinboxとrmailファイルに
メイルを重複して持つことになりますが、
メイルを紛失することはありえません。
変数@code{rmail-preserve-inbox}が@code{nil}以外ならば、
rmailは、inboxファイルからrmailファイルに新着メイルをコピーしてから
inboxファイルの内容を消しません。
たとえば、旅行中は携帯コンピュータでPOPを介してメイルを調べ、
メイルをサーバーに残しておいてあとでワークステーションに保存するように
するには、このような設定をします。

@c   In some cases, Rmail copies the new mail from the inbox file
@c indirectly.  First it runs the @code{movemail} program to move the mail
@c from the inbox to an intermediate file called
@c @file{~/.newmail-@var{inboxname}}.  Then Rmail merges the new mail from
@c that file, saves the Rmail file, and only then deletes the intermediate
@c file.  If there is a crash at the wrong time, this file continues to
@c exist, and Rmail will use it again the next time it gets new mail from
@c that inbox.
場合によっては、rmailは間接的にinboxファイルから新着メイルをコピーします。
まず、@code{movemail}プログラムを実行して、
inboxから@file{~/.newmail-@var{inboxname}}という中間ファイルに
メイルを移動します。
それから、rmailは中間ファイルから新着メイルを併合して
rmailファイルを保存してから中間ファイルを削除します。
これを実行中の都合が悪いときにクラッシュすると中間ファイルが残ってしまい、
rmailがつぎにinboxから新着メイルを
取得するときにまたそのファイルを使ってしまいます。

@pindex movemail
@c   If Rmail is unable to convert the data in
@c @file{~/.newmail-@var{inboxname}} into Babyl format, it renames the file
@c to @file{~/RMAILOSE.@var{n}} (@var{n} is an integer chosen to make the
@c name unique) so that Rmail will not have trouble with the data again.
@c You should look at the file, find whatever message confuses Rmail
@c (probably one that includes the control-underscore character, octal code
@c 037), and delete it.  Then you can use @kbd{1 g} to get new mail from
@c the corrected file.
rmailが@file{~/.newmail-@var{inboxname}}のデータを独自形式（Babyl形式）
に変換できないと、同じデータでトラブルが再発しないように
ファイル名を@file{~/RMAILOSE.@var{n}}
（@var{n}は名前が一意になるような整数）に変えます。
このファイルを調べて、rmailが解釈できなかったメッセージ
（たぶん、コントロール下線の文字、8進コード037を使ったメッセージかもしれない）
を探してそれを削除します。
そうしてから、@kbd{1 g}コマンドを使って修正したファイルから
新着メイルを取り込みます。

@c   Some sites use a method called POP for accessing users' inbox data
@c instead of storing the data in inbox files.  @code{movemail} can work
@c with POP if you compile it with the macro @code{MAIL_USE_POP} defined.
@c (You can achieve that by specifying @samp{--with-pop} when you run
@c @code{configure} during the installation of Emacs.)
@c @code{movemail} only works with POP3, not with older
@c versions of POP.
inboxファイルにデータを保存するかわりに、
POPと呼ばれる方法を用いてユーザーのinboxのデータを参照する
場合もあります。
@code{movemail}をコンパイルするときにマクロ@code{MAIL_USE_POP}を定義して
コンパイルすれば@code{movemail}はPOPを使って動きます。
（Emacsをインストールするとき、
@samp{--with-pop}を指定して@code{configure}を実行すれば、
このようにできる。）
@code{movemail}はPOP3でしか動かず、POPの古いバージョンでは使えません。

@c @cindex @code{MAILHOST} environment variable
@cindex 環境変数@code{MAILHOST}
@cindex @code{MAILHOST}（環境変数）
@cindex POP inboxes
@c   Assuming you have compiled and installed @code{movemail}
@c appropriately, you can specify a POP inbox by using a ``file name'' of
@c the form @samp{po:@var{username}}, in the inbox list of an Rmail file.
@c @code{movemail} handles such a name by opening a connection to the POP
@c server.  The @code{MAILHOST} environment variable specifies the machine
@c to look for the server on.
@code{movemail}を適切にコンパイルしてインストールしたとすると、
rmailファイルのinboxリストで、
@samp{po:@var{username}}の形の『ファイル名』でPOPのinboxを指定できます。
@code{movemail}は、そのような名前に対しては、
POPサーバーに対する接続を開きます。
@code{MAILHOST}環境変数で、どのマシンでサーバーを探すかを指定します。

@vindex rmail-pop-password
@vindex rmail-pop-password-required
@c   Accessing mail via POP may require a password.  If the variable
@c @code{rmail-pop-password} is non-@code{nil}, it specifies the password
@c to use for POP.  Alternatively, if @code{rmail-pop-password-required} is
@c non-@code{nil}, then Rmail asks you for the password to use.
POP経由でメイルを参照するにはパスワードが必要です。
変数@code{rmail-pop-password}が@code{nil}以外のときは、
これはPOPに対してを使うパスワードを指定します。
あるいは、変数@code{rmail-pop-password-required}が@code{nil}以外ならば、
rmailはユーザーにパスワードを尋ねます。

@vindex rmail-movemail-flags
@c   If you need to pass additional command-line flags to @code{movemail},
@c set the variable @code{rmail-movemail-flags} a list of the flags you
@c wish to use.  Do not use this variable to pass the @samp{-p} flag to
@c preserve your inbox contents; use @code{rmail-preserve-inbox} instead.
@code{movemail}にコマンド行オプションを追加する必要があるときには、
変数@code{rmail-movemail-flags}に指定したいオプションのリストを設定します。
inboxの内容を保存するオプション@samp{-p}を指定するために
この変数を使わないでください。
かわりに@code{rmail-preserve-inbox}を使ってください。

@c @cindex Kerberos POP authentication
@cindex Kerberos POP認証
@c   The @code{movemail} program installed at your site may support
@c Kerberos authentication.  If it is
@c supported, it is used by default whenever you attempt to retrieve
@c POP mail when @code{rmail-pop-password} and
@c @code{rmail-pop-password-required} are unset.
読者のサイトでインストールした@code{movemail}プログラムは、
Kerberos認証を使うかもしれません。
その場合、
@code{rmail-pop-password}と@code{rmail-pop-password-required}が設定されて
いなければ、POPでメイルを取得するときにデフォルトで
Kerberos認証を使います。

@c @cindex POP inboxes in reverse order
@cindex 逆順序のPOP inbox
@c   Some POP servers store messages in reverse order.  If your server does
@c this, and you would rather read your mail in the order in which it was
@c received, you can tell @code{movemail} to reverse the order of
@c downloaded messages by adding the @samp{-r} flag to
@c @code{rmail-movemail-flags}.
POPサーバーによってはメッセージを逆順序に保存します。
そのようなサーバーで受信順にメイルを読むには、
@code{rmail-movemail-flags}にフラグ@samp{-r}を追加して、
ダウンロードしたメッセージを逆順にするように
@code{movemail}に指示します。
